The European Union’s trade chief said Wednesday he hopes a visit by U.S. President Joe Biden next week will bring progress in resolving U.S.-EU trade disputes.

Speaking to the European Parliament in Strasbourg, Valdis Dombrovskis said the EU was looking for “decisive progress” on steel tariffs and a long-running clash over subsidies to airplane manufacturers.

“As a trust and confidence building measures, we have to de-escalate and solve EU-U.S. trade disputes,” Dombrovskis said.

Trade disputes between the two sides escalated during the term of former U.S. President Donald Trump, who complained that Europe treated the United States “very badly.”

Biden has made restoring ties with allies a major part of the early portion of his administration. His visit to Europe, which begins with a stop in Britain, and includes meetings with NATO and the G-7 group of nations, is his first overseas trip as president.

U.S. President Joe Biden will discuss with Russian President Vladimir Putin later this month the harboring of cyber attackers like those believed to have targeted meatpacking giant JBS, the White House said Wednesday.
 
Press secretary Jen Psaki also told reporters at the White House that Biden “has launched a rapid strategic review” of the attack that affected JBS operations in Australia and North America.
 
Biden will meet with his Russian counterpart in Geneva on June 16 as tensions between the two world powers have escalated over election meddling, human rights and Russian aggression toward Ukraine.

A U.S. subsidiary of the Brazilian meat processor told the U.S. government it received a ransom demand in the cyberattack it believes originated in Russia, deputy White House spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre said Tuesday.  
 
“The White House is engaging directly with the Russian government on this matter and delivering the message that responsible states do not harbor ransomware criminals,” Jean-Pierre said.
 
JBS, meanwhile, says it has made “significant progress” in resolving a cyberattack that affected its operations in North America and Australia.
 
JBS USA’s CEO, Andre Nogueira, said he expected “the vast majority of our beef, pork, poultry and prepared food plants” to be operational Wednesday.
 
“Our systems are coming back online and we are not sparing any resources to fight this threat. We have cybersecurity plans in place to address these types of issues and we are successfully executing those plans,” Nogueira said in a statement.
 
JBS said its Canadian beef facility had already resumed production, and that the attack did not impact its operations in Mexico or Britain.
 
The company also said it was not aware of customer, supplier or employee data being compromised.
 
“I want to personally thank the White House, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Australian and Canadian governments for their assistance over the last two days,” Nogueira said.
 
Australian Agriculture Minister David Littleproud said plants in New South Wales and Victoria states were back operating on a limited basis Wednesday, and that JBS hoped to resume work in Queensland state on Thursday.
 
Littleproud also said Australian officials would be meeting Wednesday with U.S. officials to discuss the situation.

The price of Bitcoin soared Monday as Elon Musk’s electric car company Tesla announced a $1.5 billion investment in the cryptocurrency. The company also said it would soon begin accepting the cryptocurrency as payment. 

The moves were revealed in a regulatory filing by the company. 

Bitcoin jumped nearly 14% to nearly $45,000 per coin on the news but fell to $43,658 at the time of writing. 

Musk has been a proponent of Bitcoin for some time. 

“I do at this point think Bitcoin is a good thing, and I am a supporter of Bitcoin,” Musk said January 31 during an interview on the networking app Clubhouse. “Many friends of mine have tried to convince me to get involved in Bitcoin for a long time.” 

“I think Bitcoin is really on the verge of getting broad acceptance by conventional finance people,” he added. 

Musk recently was named richest man in the world as shares in Tesla have surged. 

Tesla’s stock was up over 1.5% in early trading on Monday. 

The U.S. economy gained 559,000 jobs in May, the Labor Department reported Friday, as it continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic that forced employers to layoff millions of workers.

Last month’s gains topped April’s revised total of 278,000 new jobs, improving the jobless rate from 6.1% to 5.8%.

“We have now created over two million jobs in total since I took office, more jobs than have ever been created in the first four months of any presidency in modern history,” U.S. President Joe Biden said at a media briefing in his home state of Delaware after the report was released.

The economy’s rapid recovery from the pandemic-fueled recession has forced employers to scramble to hire workers. The gains were driven largely by the 186,000 new jobs at restaurants, other food businesses and bars.

To attract workers, many large businesses such as Amazon, Costco and Walmart have begun raising pay.

The number of people who were employed or searching for jobs fell slightly last month after three months of gains.

In April there were about eight million fewer jobs compared to pre-pandemic levels, and nearly 10 million people were unemployed.

Biden said last month’s job gains also were spurred by the country’s vaccination campaign. He said since the first week in May, when 35% of working age adults were fully vaccinated, “21 million more adults have gotten vaccinated, making it easier for them to return to work safely.”

The economy grew in the first quarter at a strong 6.4% annual rate, and Biden said when he took office in January, independent experts projected the economy would grow between 3% to 4 % this year. But he said the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development this week increased the projection to 6.9 percent.

“This is progress, historic progress, progress that’s pulling our economy out of the worst crisis it’s been [in] 100 years,” Biden said.

The president warned that continued economic progress is not guaranteed, and that is why he proposed spending billions on a national infrastructure rebuilding plan and on an array of spending programs and tax cuts for families. 

Biden added that talks with lawmakers on his infrastructure proposal would resume later Friday. He has offered concessions to Senate Republicans in an effort to reach an agreement. 

The White House on Thursday urged American businesses to take new precautions to combat disruptive ransomware attacks that have increasingly hobbled companies throughout Western economies.

Jen Psaki, President Joe Biden’s press secretary, urged private industry to harden access to their computer systems, saying the government "can't do it alone.”

Anne Neuberger, a White House cybersecurity official, said in a statement that the “most important takeaway” from the recent attacks, including those affecting a key gasoline pipeline and a meat production company in the U.S., is that “companies that view ransomware as a threat to their core business operations rather than a simple risk of data theft will react and recover more effectively.”

“Many ransomware criminals are aggressive and sophisticated and will find the equivalent of unlocked doors,” Neuberger said. “The threats are serious, and they are increasing.”

She urged businesses to “back up your data, system images, and configurations, regularly test them, and keep the backups offline.”

Neuberger said companies should “ensure that backups are regularly tested and that they are not connected to the business network, as many ransomware variants try to find and encrypt or delete accessible backups.”

The deputy national security adviser for cyber and emerging tech also said U.S. businesses should “test your incident response plan” because “there’s nothing that shows the gaps in plans more than testing them.”

Neuberger said companies should use third parties to test their own security work, segment corporate business functions from manufacturing and production operations and regularly test contingency plans “so that safety critical functions can be maintained during a cyber incident.”

The European Union’s trade chief said Wednesday he hopes a visit by U.S. President Joe Biden next week will bring progress in resolving U.S.-EU trade disputes.

Speaking to the European Parliament in Strasbourg, Valdis Dombrovskis said the EU was looking for “decisive progress” on steel tariffs and a long-running clash over subsidies to airplane manufacturers.

“As a trust and confidence building measures, we have to de-escalate and solve EU-U.S. trade disputes,” Dombrovskis said.

Trade disputes between the two sides escalated during the term of former U.S. President Donald Trump, who complained that Europe treated the United States “very badly.”

Biden has made restoring ties with allies a major part of the early portion of his administration. His visit to Europe, which begins with a stop in Britain, and includes meetings with NATO and the G-7 group of nations, is his first overseas trip as president.

U.S. stocks closed lower Friday on news that U.S. President Donald Trump had tested positive for COVID-19, but the losses were less than what investors had braced for in the early morning.

Stocks pared losses from the morning after the White House gave assurances that Trump, who was experiencing mild symptoms, was not incapacitated.

The S&P 500 fell 32 points, or 1%, to 3,348. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 134 points, or 0.5%, while the Nasdaq Composite Index fell 251, or 2.2%.

The comeback from earlier losses was also the result of an announcement Friday by U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi that an agreement to provide another $25 billion in government assistance to the airline industry was "imminent."

Also affecting the markets Friday was the latest U.S. jobs report, usually the headline economic development each month. The government reported that 661,000 jobs were added in September as the economy slowly recovers from the worst of the coronavirus pandemic this spring. But that was a smaller jobs bump than economists were expecting and the third straight month of slower-than-expecting hiring.

Overnight, markets were down. In Asia, the world’s third-largest stock market index, Japan’s benchmark Nikkei, closed down 0.7%, erasing the gains of Thursday.

Sydney, Singapore, Jakarta and Bangkok markets were also down, all more than 1% lower. Only Manila and Wellington markets rose. Hong Kong and Shanghai markets were closed because of a national holiday in China. London, Paris and Frankfurt markets all fell more than 1% at the open.

The U.S. Federal Reserve signaled Wednesday a sooner-than-expected increase in interest rates as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to recede and inflation continues to rise. 

In a statement, the Fed said it would likely raise the short-term interest rate twice by late 2023. It had previously said there would be no hike before 2024. 

The Fed has kept interest rates near zero during the pandemic, but now it sees the threat of the pandemic dissipating as the economy heats up. 

"Progress on vaccinations has reduced the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. Amid this progress and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened," the Fed said in a statement. 

Another reason for the change in position is inflation, which in May jumped 5% compared with a year ago, according to the government. It was the largest 12-month increase in prices since 2008, The Associated Press reported. The Fed raised its inflation outlook to 3.4% by year's end, up from the 2.4% projected in March. 

Despite the economic growth, job growth has been lacking. There are still 7.5 million fewer jobs than in February 2020, when the pandemic hit. 

The Fed's statement sent stocks lower and bond yields higher. 

U.S.-based air carrier United Airlines announced Thursday that it had reached an agreement with a Denver-based startup company for 15 supersonic aircraft the company said would fly 1.7 times the speed of sound using sustainable fuel and be 100% carbon neutral.

In a press release, the airline said its deal with aerospace company Boom Supersonic has an option to buy 35 more planes once the company develops its first aircraft. The airline said this was the world’s first purchase agreement for net-zero carbon supersonic aircraft. Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

On its website, Boom Supersonic said its Overture aircraft would be capable of flying 1.7 times the speed of sound — about 2,092 kilometers per hour — more than twice the speed of conventional airliners. The company said the plane would carry a maximum of 88 passengers, cruise at an altitude of about 18,288 meters and fly on 100% sustainable, carbon-neutral fuel. It hopes to deliver the planes to United by 2029.

The Overture is still in development. On its website, Boom Supersonic said it hoped to build and test fly the first plane by next year.

Should the plane get off the ground as planned, it will be the first supersonic airliner to fly since the Concorde was retired in 2003. The luxury plane was introduced in 1976 and flew passengers across the Atlantic via Air France and British Airways.

But because of expense, noise and environmental issues, the planes never really caught on. In 2000, an Air France Concorde crashed into a hotel shortly after takeoff from Paris, killing everyone on board and four people on the ground.
